<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2 epub:type="title">At the Farmhouse</h2>
<p>The dusk of a November day was falling fast when
John Aylsford came out of his lodging in the cobbled
street and started to walk briskly along the road
which led eastwards by the shore of the bay. He
had been at work while the daylight served him,
and now, when the gathering darkness weaned him
from his easel, he was accustomed to go out for air
and exercise and cover half a dozen miles before he
returned to his solitary supper.</p>
<p>To-night there were but few folk abroad, and those
scudded along before the strong south-westerly gale
which had roared and raged all day, or, leaning
forward, beat their way against it. No fishing-boats
had put forth on that maddened sea, but had lain
moored behind the quay-wall, tossing uneasily with
the backwash of the great breakers that swept by
the pier-head. The tide was low now, and they
rested on the sandy beach, black blots against the
smooth wet surface which sombrely reflected the
last flames in the west. The sun had gone down
in a wrack of broken and flying clouds, angry and
menacing with promise of a wild night to come.</p>
<p>For many days past, at this hour John Aylsford
had started eastwards for his tramp along the rough
coast road by the bay. The last high tide had swept
shingle and sand over sections of it, and fragments of
seaweed, driven by the wind, bowled along the
ruts. The heavy boom of the breakers sounded
sullenly in the dusk, and white towers of foam
appearing and disappearing showed how high they
leaped over the reefs of rock beyond the headland.
For half a mile or so, slanting himself against the
gale he pursued this road, then turned up a narrow
muddy lane sunk deep between the banks on either
side of it. It ran steeply uphill, dipped down again,
and joined the main road inland. Having arrived
at the junction, John Aylsford went eastwards no
more, but turned his steps to the west, arriving,
half an hour after he had set out, on the top of the
hill above the village he had quitted, though five
minutes’ ascent would have taken him from his
lodgings to the spot where he now stood looking down
on the scattered lights below him. The wind had blown
all wayfarers indoors, and now in front of him the
road that crossed this high and desolate table-land,
sprinkled here and there with lonely cottages and
solitary farms, lay empty and greyly glimmering in the
wind-swept darkness, not more than faintly visible.</p>
<p>Many times during this past month had John
Aylsford made this long detour, starting eastwards
from the village and coming back by a wide circuit,
and now, as on these other occasions, he paused in
the black shelter of the hedge through which the
wind hissed and whistled, crouching there in the
shadow as if to make sure that none had followed
him, and that the road in front lay void of passengers,
for he had no mind to be observed by any on these
journeyings. And as he paused he let his hate blaze
up, warming him for the work the accomplishment
of which alone could enable him to recapture any
peace or profit from life. To-night he was determined
to release himself from the millstone which
for so many years had hung round his neck, drowning
him in bitter waters. From long brooding over
the idea of the deed, he had quite ceased to feel any
horror of it. The death of that drunken slut was
not a matter for qualms or uneasiness; the world
would be well rid of her, and he more than well.</p>
<p>No spark of tenderness for the handsome fisher-girl
who once had been his model and for twenty years
had been his wife pierced the blackness of his purpose.
Just here it was that he had seen her first when
on a summer holiday he had lodged with a couple
of friends in the farmhouse towards which his way
now lay. She was coming up the hill with the late
sunset gilding her face, and, breathing quickly from
the ascent, had leaned on the wall close by with a
smile and a glance for the young man. She had
sat to him, and the autumn brought the sequel to
the summer in his marriage. He had bought from
her uncle the little farmhouse where he had lodged,
adding to its modest accommodation a studio and
a bedroom above it, and there he had seen the flicker
of what had never been love, die out, and over the
cold ashes of its embers the poisonous lichen of hatred
spread fast. Early in their married life she had
taken to drink, and had sunk into a degradation
of soul and body that seemed bottomless, dragging
him with her, down and down, in the grip of a force
that was hardly human in its malignity.</p>
<p>Often during the wretched years that followed
he had tried to leave her; he had offered to settle
the farm on her and make adequate provision for
her, but she had clung to the possession of him,
not, it would seem, from any affection for him,
but for a reason exactly opposite, namely, that
her hatred of him fed and glutted itself on the sight
of his ruin. It was as if, in obedience to some hellish
power, she set herself to spoil his life, his powers,
his possibilities, by tying him to herself. And by
the aid of that power, so sometimes he had thought,
she enforced her will on him, for, plan as he might
to cut the whole dreadful business and leave the wreck
behind him, he had never been able to consolidate
his resolve into action. There, but a few miles away,
was the station from which ran the train that would
bear him out of this ancient western kingdom, where
the beliefs in spells and superstitions grew rank as
the herbage in that soft enervating air, and set him
in the dry hard light of cities. The way lay open,
but he could not take it; something unseen and
potent, of grim inflexibility, held him back....</p>
<p>He had passed no one on his way here, and satisfied
now that in the darkness he could proceed without
fear of being recognised if a chance wayfarer came
from the direction in which he was going, he left
the shelter of the hedge, and struck out into the
stormy sea of that stupendous gale. Even as a man
in the grip of imminent death sees his past life spread
itself out in front of him for his final survey before
the book is closed, so now, on the brink of the new
life from which the deed on which he was determined
alone separated him, John Aylsford, as he battled
his advance through this great tempest, turned over
page after page of his own wretched chronicles,
feeling already strangely detached from them; it
was as if he read the sordid and enslaved annals
of another, wondering at them, half-pitying, half-despising
him who had allowed himself to be bound
so long in this ruinous noose.</p>
<p>Yes; it had been just that, a noose drawn ever
tighter round his neck, while he choked and struggled
all unavailingly. But there was another noose which
should very soon now be drawn rapidly and finally
tight, and the drawing of that in his own strong
hands would free him. As he dwelt on that for a
moment, his fingers stroked and patted the hank
of whipcord that lay white and tough in his pocket.
A noose, a knot drawn quickly taut, and he would
have paid her back with justice and swifter mercy
for the long strangling which he had suffered.</p>
<p>Voluntarily and eagerly at the beginning had he
allowed her to slip the noose about him, for Ellen
Trenair’s beauty in those days, so long past and so
everlastingly regretted, had been enough to ensnare
a man. He had been warned at the time, by hint
and half-spoken suggestion, that it was ill for a man
to mate with a girl of that dark and ill-famed family,
or for a woman to wed a boy in whose veins ran the
blood of Jonas Trenair, once Methodist preacher,
who learned on one All-Hallows’ Eve a darker gospel
than he had ever preached before. What had happened
to the girls who had married into that dwindling
family, now all but extinct? One, before her
marriage was a year old, had gone off her head, and
now, a withered and ancient crone, mowed and
gibbered about the streets of the village, picking
garbage from the gutter and munching it in her
toothless jaws. Another, Ellen’s own mother, had
been found hanging from the banister of her stairs,
stark and grim. Then there was young Frank
Pencarris, who had wed Ellen’s sister. He had sunk
into an awful melancholy, and sat tracing on sheets of
paper the visions that beset his eyes, headless shapes,
and foaming mouths, and the images of the spawn of
hell.... John Aylsford, in those early days, had
laughed to scorn these old-wife tales of spells and
sorceries: they belonged to ages long past, whereas
fair Ellen Trenair was of the lovely present, and had
lit desire in his heart which she alone could assuage.
He had no use, in the brightness of her eye, for such
shadows and superstitions; her beams dispelled them.</p>
<p>Bitter and black as midnight had his enlightenment
been, darkening through dubious dusks till
the mirk of the pit itself enveloped him. His
laughter at the notion that in this twentieth century
spells and sorceries could survive, grew silent on his
lips. He had seen the cattle of a neighbour who
had offended one whom it was wiser not to cross,
dwindle and pine, though there were rich pastures
for their grazing, till the rib-bones stuck out like
the timbers of stranded wrecks. He had seen the
spring on another farm run dry at lambing-time
because the owner, sceptic like himself, had refused
that bounty, which all prudent folk paid to the wizard
of Mareuth, who, like Ellen, was of the blood of Jonas
Trenair. From scorn and laughter he had wavered
to an uneasy wonder, and from wonder his mind
had passed to the conviction that there were powers
occult and terrible which strove in darkness and
prevailed, secrets and spells that could send disease
on man and beast, dark incantations, known to few,
which could maim and cripple, and of these few his
wife was one. His reason revolted, but some conviction,
deeper than reason, held its own. To such a
view it seemed that the deed he contemplated was no
crime, but rather an act of obedience to the ordinance
“Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.” And the
sense of detachment was over that, even as over the
memories that oozed up in his mind. Somebody—not
he—who had planned everything very carefully was in
the next hour going to put an end to his bondage.</p>
<p>So the years had passed, he floundering ever deeper
in the slough into which he was plunged, out of which
while she lived he could never emerge. For the last
year, she, wearying of his perpetual presence at the
farm, had allowed him to take a lodging in the village.
She did not loose her hold over him, for the days
were few on which she did not come with demands
for a handful of shillings to procure her the raw
spirits which alone could slake her thirst. Sometimes
as he sat at work there in the north room looking
on to the small garden-yard, she would come lurching
up the path, with her bloated crimson face set on
the withered neck, and tap at his window with fingers
shrivelled like bird’s claws. Body and limbs were
no more than bones over which the wrinkled skin
was stretched, but her face bulged monstrously with
layers of fat. He would give her whatever he had
about him, and if it was not enough, she would plant
herself there, grinning at him and wheedling him,
or with screams and curses threatening him with
such fate as he had known to overtake those who
crossed her will. But usually he gave her enough
to satisfy her for that day and perhaps the next,
for thus she would the more quickly drink herself
to death. Yet death seemed long in coming....</p>
<p>He remembered well how first the notion of killing
her came into his head, just a little seed, small as
that of mustard, which lay long in barrenness. Only
the bare idea of it was there, like an abstract proposition.
Then imperceptibly in the fruitful darkness
of his mind, it must have begun to sprout, for presently
a tendril, still soft and white, prodded out into the
daylight. He almost pushed it back again, for fear
that she, by some divining art, should probe his
purpose. But when next she came for supplies,
he saw no gleam of surmise in her red-rimmed eyes,
and she took her money and went her way, and his
purpose put forth another leaf, and the stem of it
grew sappy. All autumn through it had flourished,
and grown tree-like, and fresh ideas, fresh details,
fresh precautions, flocked there like building birds
and made it gay with singing. He sat under the
shadow of it and listened with brightening hopes to
their song; never had there been such peerless
melody. They knew their tunes now, there was no
need for any further rehearsal.</p>
<p>He began to wonder how soon he would be back
on the road again, with face turned from this buffeting
wind, and on his way home. His business would
not take him long; the central deed of it would
be over in a couple of minutes, and he did not anticipate
delay about the setting to work on it, for by
seven o’clock of the evening, as well he knew, she
was usually snoring in the oblivion of complete
drunkenness, and even if she was not as far gone as
that, she would certainly be incapable of any serious
resistance. After that, a quarter of an hour more
would finish the job, and he would leave the house
secure already from any chance of detection. Night
after night during these last ten days he had been
up here, peering from the darkness into the lighted
room where she sat, then listening for her step on
the stairs as she stumbled up to bed, or hearing her
snorings as she slept in her chair below. The out-house,
he knew, was well stocked with paraffin;
he needed no further apparatus than the whipcord
and the matches he carried with him. Then back
he would go along the exact route by which he had
come, re-entering the village again from the eastwards,
in which direction he had set out.</p>
<p>This walk of his was now a known and established
habit; half the village during the last week or two had
seen him every evening set forth along the coast road,
for a tramp in the dusk when the light failed for his
painting, and had seen him come back again as they
hung about and smoked in the warm dusk, a couple
of hours later. None knew of his detour to the main
road which took him westwards again above the
village and so to the stretch of bleak upland along
which now he fought his way against the gale.
Always round about the hour of eight he had entered
the village again from the other side, and had stopped
and chatted with the loiterers. To-night, no later
than was usual, he would come up the cobbled road
again, and give “good night” to any who lingered
there outside the public-house. In this wild wind
it was not likely that there would be such, and if so,
no matter; he had been seen already setting forth
on his usual walk by the coast of the bay, and if
none outside saw him return, none could see the
true chart of his walk. By eight he should be back
to his supper, there would be a soused herring for
him, and a cut of cheese, and the kettle would be
singing on the hob for his hot whisky-toddy. He
would have a keen edge for the enjoyment of them
to-night; he would drink long healths to the damned
and the dead. Not till to-morrow, probably, would
the news of what had happened reach him, for the
farmhouse lay lonely and sheltered by the wood of
firs. However high might mount the beacon of
its blazing, it would scarcely, screened by the tall
trees, light up the western sky, and be seen from the
village nestling below the steep hill-crest.</p>
<p>By now John Aylsford had come to the fir wood
which bordered the road on the left, and, as he
passed into its shelter, cut off from him the violence
of the gale. All its branches were astir with the
sound of some vexed, overhead sea, and the trunks
that upheld them creaked and groaned in the fury
of the tempest. Somewhere behind the thick scud
of flying cloud the moon must have risen, for the road
glimmered more visibly, and the tossing blackness
of the branches was clear enough against the grey
tumult overhead. Behind the tempest she rode in
serene skies, and in the murderous clarity of his mind
he likened himself to her. Just for half an hour more
he would still grope and scheme and achieve in this
hurly-burly, and then, like a balloon released, soar
through the clouds and find serenity. A couple of
hundred yards now would take him round the corner
of the wood; from there the miry lane led from
the high-road to the farm.</p>
<p>He hastened rather than retarded his going as
he drew near, for the wood, though it roared with
the gale, began to whisper to him of memories.
Often in that summer before his marriage had he
strayed out at dusk into it, certain that before he
had gone many paces he would see a shadow flitting
towards him through the firs, or hear the crack of
dry twigs in the stillness. Here was their tryst;
she would come up from the village with the excuse
of bringing fish to the farmhouse, after the boats
had come in, and deserting the high-road make a
short cut through the wood. Like some distant
blink of lightning the memory of those evenings
quivered distantly on his mind, and he quickened
his step. The years that followed had killed and
buried those recollections, but who knew what stirring
of corpses and dry bones might not yet come to them
if he lingered there? He fingered the whipcord
in his pocket, and launched out, beyond the trees,
into the full fury of the gale.</p>
<p>The farmhouse was near now and in full view,
a black blot against the clouds. A beam of light
shone from an uncurtained window on the ground-floor,
and the rest was dark. Even thus had he
seen it for many nights past, and well knew what
sight would greet him as he stole up nearer. And
even so it was to-night, for there she sat in the
studio he had built, betwixt table and fireplace
with the bottle near her, and her withered hands
stretched out to the blaze, and the huge bloated
face swaying on her shoulders. Beside her to-night
were the wrecked remains of a chair, and the first
sight that he caught of her was to show her feeding
the fire with the broken pieces of it. It had been
too troublesome to bring fresh logs from the store
of wood; to break up a chair was the easier task.</p>
<p>She stirred and sat more upright, then reached
out for the bottle that stood beside her, and drank
from the mouth of it. She drank and licked her lips
and drank again, and staggered to her feet, tripping
on the edge of the hearthrug. For the moment
that seemed to anger her, and with clenched teeth
and pointing finger she mumbled at it; then once
more she drank, and lurching forward, took the
lamp from the table. With it in her hand she
shuffled to the door, and the room was left to the
flickering firelight. A moment afterwards, the bedroom
window above sprang into light, an oblong of
bright illumination.</p>
<p>As soon as that appeared he crept round the house
to the door. He gently turned the handle of it,
and found it unlocked. Inside was a small passage
entrance, on the left of which ascended the stairs
to the bedroom above the studio. All was silent
there, but from where he stood he could see that the
door into the bedroom was open, for a shaft of light
from the lamp she had carried up with her was shed
on to the landing there.... Everything was
smoothing itself out to render his course most easy.
Even the gale was his friend, for it would be bellows
for the fire. He slipped off his shoes, leaving them
on the mat, and drew the whipcord from his pocket.
He made a noose in it, and began to ascend the stairs.
They were well-built of seasoned oak, and no creak
betrayed his advancing footfall.</p>
<p>At the top he paused, listening for any stir of
movement within, but there was nothing to be heard
but the sound of heavy breathing from the bed that
lay to the left of the door and out of sight. She
had thrown herself down there, he guessed, without
undressing, leaving the lamp to burn itself out. He
could see it through the open door already beginning
to flicker; on the wall behind it were a couple of
water-colours, pictures of his own, one of the little
walled garden by the farm, the other of the pinewood
of their tryst. Well he remembered painting them:
she would sit by him as he worked with prattle and
singing. He looked at them now quite detachedly;
they seemed to him wonderfully good, and he envied the
artist that fresh, clean skill. Perhaps he would take
them down presently and carry them away with him.</p>
<p>Very softly now he advanced into the room,
and looking round the corner of the door, he saw
her, sprawling and fully dressed on the broad bed.
She lay on her back, eyes closed and mouth open, her
dull grey hair spread over the pillow. Evidently she
had not made the bed that day, for she lay stretched
on the crumpled back-turned blankets. A hair-brush
was on the floor beside her; it seemed to have fallen
from her hand. He moved quickly towards her.</p>
<hr/>
<p>He put on his shoes again when he came to the
foot of the stairs, carrying the lamp with him and
the two pictures which he had taken down from
the wall, and went into the studio. He set the lamp
on the table and drew down the blinds, and his
eye fell on the half-empty whisky bottle from which
he had seen her drinking. Though his hand was
quite steady and his mind composed and tranquil,
there was yet at the back of it some impression that
was slowly developing, and a good dose of spirits
would no doubt expunge that. He drank half a
tumbler of it raw and undiluted, and though it
seemed no more than water in his mouth, he soon
felt that it was doing its work and sponging away
from his mind the picture that had been outlining
itself there. In a couple of minutes he was quite
himself again, and could afford to wonder and laugh
at the illusion, for it was no less than that, which
had been gaining on him. For though he could
distinctly remember drawing the noose tight, and
seeing the face grow black, and struggling with the
convulsive movements of those withered limbs that
soon lay quiet again, there had sprung up in his mind
some unaccountable impression that what he had
left there huddled on the bed was not just the bundle
of withered limbs and strangled neck, but the body
of a young girl, smooth of skin and golden of hair,
with mouth that smiled drowsily. She had been
asleep when he came in, and now was half-awake,
and was stirring and stretching herself. In what
dim region of his mind that image had formed itself,
he had no idea; all he cared about now was that
his drink had shattered it again, and he could proceed
with order and method to make all secure. Just
one drop more first: how lucky it was that this
morning he had been liberal with his money when
she came to the village, for he would have been
sorry to have gone without that fillip to his nerves.</p>
<p>He looked at his watch, and saw to his satisfaction
that it was still only a little after seven o’clock.
Half an hour’s walking, with this gale to speed his
steps, would easily carry him from door to door,
round the detour which approached the village
from the east, and a quarter of an hour, so he reckoned,
would be sufficient to accomplish thoroughly what
remained to be done here. He must not hurry
and thus overlook some precaution needful for his
safety, though, on the other hand, he would be glad
to be gone from the house as soon as might be, and
he proceeded to set about his work without delay.
There was brushwood and fire-kindling to be brought
in from the wood-shed in the yard, and he made
three journeys, returning each time with his arms
full, before he had brought in what he judged to be
sufficient. Most of this he piled in a loose heap in
the studio; with the rest he ascended once more to
the bedroom above and made a heap of it there in
the middle of the floor. He took the curtains down
from the windows, for they would make a fine wick for
the paraffin, and stuffed them into the pile. Before
he left, he looked once more at what lay on the bed,
and marvelled at the illusion which the whisky had
dispelled, and as he looked, the sense that he was free
mounted and bubbled in his head. The thing seemed
scarcely human at all; it was a monster from which
he had delivered himself, and now, with the thought
of that to warm him, he was no longer eager to get
through with his work and be gone, for it was all part
of that act of riddance which he had accomplished,
and he gloried in it. Soon, when all was ready, he
would come back once more and soak the fuel and set
light to it, and purge with fire the corruption that lay
humped on the bed.</p>
<p>The fury of the gale had increased with nightfall,
and as he went downstairs again he heard the rattle
of loosened tiles on the roof, and the crash as they
shattered themselves on the cobbles of the yard.
At that a sudden misgiving made his breath to catch
in his throat, as he pictured to himself some maniac
blast falling on the house and crashing in the walls
that now trembled and shuddered. Supposing the
whole house fell, even if he escaped with his life
from the toppling ruin, what would his life be worth?
There would be search made in the fallen débris to
find the body of her who lay strangled with the
whipcord round her neck, and he pictured to himself
the slow, relentless march of justice. He had bought
whipcord only yesterday at a shop in the village,
insisting on its strength and toughness ... would
it be wiser now, this moment, to untie the noose
and take it back with him or add it to his brushwood?...
He paused on the staircase, pondering that;
but his flesh quaked at the thought, and master of
himself though he had been during those few struggling
minutes, he distrusted his power of making himself
handle once more that which could struggle no longer.
But even as he tried to screw his courage to the
point, the violence of the squall passed, and the
shuddering house braced itself again. He need not
fear that; the gale was his friend that would blow
on the flames, not his enemy. The blasts that
trumpeted overhead were the voices of the allies
who had come to aid him.</p>
<p>All was arranged then upstairs for the pouring
of the paraffin and the lighting of the pyre; it remained
but to make similar dispositions in the studio.
He would stay to feed the flames till they raged
beyond all power of extinction; and now he began
to plan the line of his retreat. There were two doors
in the studio: one by the fireplace which opened
on to the little garden; the other gave into the
passage entrance from which mounted the stairs
and so to the door through which he had come into
the house. He decided to use the garden-door for
his exit; but when he came to open it, he found that
the key was stiff in the rusty lock, and did not yield
to his efforts. There was no use in wasting time
over that; it made no difference through which
door he finally emerged, and he began piling up his
heap of wood at that end of the room. The lamp
was burning low; but the fire, which only so few
minutes ago she had fed with a broken chair, shone
brightly, and a flaming ember from it would serve
to set light to his conflagration. There was a straw
mat in front of it, which would make fine kindling,
and with these two fires, one in the bedroom upstairs
and the other here, there would be no mistake about
the incineration of the house and all that it contained.
His own crime, if crime it was, would perish, too, and
all evidence thereof, victim and whipcord, and the
very walls of the house of sin and hate. It was a
great deed and a fine adventure, and as the liquor
he had drunk began to circulate more buoyantly
through his veins, he gloried at the thought of the
approaching consummation. He would slip out of
the sordid tragedy of his past life, as from a discarded
garment that he threw into the bonfire he
would soon kindle.</p>
<p>All was ready now for the soaking of the fuel he had
piled with the paraffin, and he went out to the shed in
the yard where the barrel stood. A big tin ewer stood
beside it, which he filled and carried indoors. That
would be sufficient for the soaking of the pile upstairs,
and fetching the smoky and flickering lamp from
the studio, he went up again, and like a careful
gardener watering some bed of choice blossoms, he
sprinkled and poured till his ewer was empty. He
gave but one glance to the bed behind him, where
the huddled thing lay so quietly, and as he turned,
lamp in hand, to go down again, the draught that came
in through the window against which the gale blew,
extinguished it. A little blue flame of burning
vapour rose in the chimney and went out; so, having
no further use for it, he pitched it on to the pile of
soaked material. As he left the room he thought
he heard some small stir of movement behind him,
but he told himself that it was but something slipping
in the heap he had built there.</p>
<p>Again he went out into the storm. The clouds
that scudded overhead were thinner now, though
the gale blew not less fiercely, and the blurred, watery
moonlight was brighter. Once for a moment, as
he approached the shed, he caught sight of the full
orb plunging madly among the streaming vapours;
then she was hidden again behind the wrack. Close
in front of him were the fir trees of the wood where
those sweet trysts had been held, and once again
the vision of her as she had been broke into his
mind and the queer conviction that it was no withered
and bloated hag, who lay on the bed upstairs but
the fair, comely limbs and the golden head. It
was even more vivid now, and he made haste to get
back to the studio, where he would find the trusty
medicine that had dispelled that vision before. He
would have to make two journeys at least with his
tin ewer before he transported enough oil to feed
the larger pyre below, and so, to save time, he took
the barrel off its stand, and rolled it along the path
and into the house. He paused at the foot of the
stairs, listening to hear if anything stirred, but all
was silent. Whatever had slipped up there was
steady again; from outside only came the squeal
and bellow of the wind.</p>
<p>The studio was brightly but fitfully lit by the
flames on the hearth; at one moment a noonday
blazed there, the next but the last smoulder of some
red sunset. It was easier to decant from the barrel
into his ewer than carry the heavy keg and sprinkle
from it, and once and once again he filled and emptied
it. One more application would be sufficient, and
after that he could let what remained trickle out on
to the floor. But by some awkward movement
he managed to spill a splash of it down the front of
his trousers: he must be sure, therefore (how quickly
his brain responded with counsels of precautions),
to have some accident with his lamp when he came
in to his supper, which should account for this little
misadventure. Or, probably, the wind through
which he would presently be walking would dry it
before he reached the village.</p>
<p>So, for the last time with matches ready in his
hand, he mounted the stairs to set light to the fuel
piled in the room above. His second dose of whisky
sang in his head, and he said to himself, smiling at
the humour of the notion, “She always liked a fire
in her bedroom; she shall have it now.” That
seemed a very comical idea, and it dwelt in his head
as he struck the match which should light it for her.
Then, still grinning, he gave one glance to the bed,
and the smile died on his face, and the wild cymbals
of panic crashed in his brain. The bed was empty;
no huddled shape lay there.</p>
<p>Distraught with terror, he thrust the match into
the soaked pile and the flame flared up. Perhaps
the body had rolled off the bed. It must, in any
case, be here somewhere, and when once the room
was alight there would be nothing more to fear.
High rose the smoky flame, and banging the door,
he leaped down the stairs to set light to the pile
below and be gone from the house. Yet, whatever
monstrous miracle his eye had assured him of, it
could not be that she still lived and had left the
place where she lay, for she had ceased to breathe
when the noose was tight round her neck, and her
fight for life and air had long been stilled. But,
if by some hideous witchcraft, she was not dead, it
would soon be over now with her in the stupefaction of
the smoke and the scorching flames. Let be; the door
was shut and she within, for him it remained to be
finished with the business, and flee from the house of
terror, lest he leave the sanity of his soul behind him.</p>
<p>The red glare from the hearth in the studio lit
his steps down the passage from the stairway, and
already he could hear from above the dry crack and
snap from the fire that prospered there. As he
shuffled in, he held his hands to his head, as if pressing
the brain back into its cool case, from which it seemed
eager to fly out into the welter of storm and fire and
hideous imagination. If he could only control himself
for a few moments more, all would be done and he
would escape from this disordered haunted place into
the night and the gale, leaving behind him the blaze
that would burn away all perilous stuff. Again
the flames broke out in the embers on the hearth,
bravely burning, and he took from the heart of the
glare a fragment on which the fire was bursting
into yellow flowers. He heeded not the scorching
of his hand, for it was but for a moment that he held
it, and then plunged it into the pile that dripped
with the oil he had poured on it. A tower of flame
mounted, licking the rafters of the low ceiling, then
died away as if suffocated by its own smoke, but
crept onwards, nosing its way along till it reached
the straw mat, which blazed fiercely. That blaze
kindled the courage in him; whatever trick his
imagination had played on him just now, he had
nothing to fear except his own terror, which now
he mastered again, for nothing real could ever escape
from the conflagration, and it was only the real that
he feared. Spells and witchcrafts and superstitions,
such as for the last twenty years had battened on
him, were all enclosed in that tight-drawn noose.</p>
<p>It was time to be gone, for all was safe now, and
the room was growing to oven-heat. But as he picked
his way across the floor over which runnels of flames
from the split barrel were beginning to spread this
way and that, he heard from above the sound of a
door unlatched, and footsteps light and firm tapped
on the stairs. For one second the sheer catalepsy
of panic seized him, but he recovered his control,
and with hands that groped through the thick smoke
he found the door. At that moment the fire shot up
in a blaze of blinding flame, and there in the doorway
stood Ellen. It was no withered body and bloated
face that confronted him, but she with whom he had
trysted in the wood, with the bloom of eternal youth
upon her, and the smooth soft hand, on which was
her wedding-ring, pointed at him.</p>
<p>It was in vain that he called on himself to rush
forward out of that torrid and suffocating air. The
front door was open, he had but to pass her and
speed forth safe into the night. But no power
from his will reached his limbs; his will screamed
to him, “Go, go! Push by her: it is but a phantom
which you fear!” but muscle and sinew were in
mutiny, and step by step he retreated before that
pointing finger and the radiant shape that advanced on
him. The flames that flickered over the floor had discovered
the paraffin he had spilt, and leaped up his leg.</p>
<p>Just one spot in his brain retained lucidity from
the encompassing terror. Somewhere behind that
barrier of fire there was the second door into the
garden. He had but cursorily attempted to unlock
its rusty wards; now, surely, the knowledge that
there alone was escape would give strength to his
hand. He leaped backwards through the flames,
still with eyes fixed on her who ever advanced in
time with his retreat, and turning, wrestled and
strove with the key. Something snapped in his
hand, and there still in the keyhole was the bare shaft.</p>
<p>Holding his breath, for the heat scorched his throat,
he groped towards where he knew was the window
through which he had first seen her that night. The
flames licked fiercely round it, but there, beneath
his hand, was the hasp, and he threw it open. At
that the wind poured in as through the nozzle of
a plied bellows, and Death rose high and bright
around him. Through the flames, as he sank to the
floor, a face radiant with revenge smiled on him.</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
