<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Mrs. Amworth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="mrs-amworth" epub:type="se:short-story">
			
<h2 epub:type="title">Mrs. Amworth</h2>
<p>The village of Maxley, where, last summer and
autumn, these strange events took place, lies on a
heathery and pine-clad upland of Sussex. In all
England you could not find a sweeter and saner
situation. Should the wind blow from the south,
it comes laden with the spices of the sea; to the
east high downs protect it from the inclemencies of
March; and from the west and north the breezes
which reach it travel over miles of aromatic forest
and heather. The village itself is insignificant
enough in point of population, but rich in amenities
and beauty. Half-way down the single street, with
its broad road and spacious areas of grass on each
side, stands the little Norman Church and the antique
graveyard long disused: for the rest there are a
dozen small, sedate Georgian houses, red-bricked
and long-windowed, each with a square of flower-garden
in front, and an ampler strip behind; a
score of shops, and a couple of score of thatched
cottages belonging to labourers on neighbouring
estates, complete the entire cluster of its peaceful
habitations. The general peace, however, is sadly
broken on Saturdays and Sundays, for we lie on one
of the main roads between London and Brighton
and our quiet street becomes a race-course for flying
motor-cars and bicycles. A notice just outside the
village begging them to go slowly only seems to
encourage them to accelerate their speed, for the
road lies open and straight, and there is really no
reason why they should do otherwise. By way of
protest, therefore, the ladies of Maxley cover their
noses and mouths with their handkerchiefs as they
see a motor-car approaching, though, as the street
is asphalted, they need not really take these precautions
against dust. But late on Sunday night
the horde of scorchers has passed, and we settle
down again to five days of cheerful and leisurely
seclusion. Railway strikes which agitate the country
so much leave us undisturbed because most of the
inhabitants of Maxley never leave it at all.</p>
<p>I am the fortunate possessor of one of these small
Georgian houses, and consider myself no less fortunate
in having so interesting and stimulating a neighbour
as Francis Urcombe, who, the most confirmed of
Maxleyites, has not slept away from his house, which
stands just opposite to mine in the village street,
for nearly two years, at which date, though still in
middle life, he resigned his Physiological Professorship
at Cambridge University and devoted himself to the
study of those occult and curious phenomena which
seem equally to concern the physical and the psychical
sides of human nature. Indeed his retirement was
not unconnected with his passion for the strange
uncharted places that lie on the confines and
borders of science, the existence of which is so stoutly
denied by the more materialistic minds, for he advocated
that all medical students should be obliged
to pass some sort of examination in mesmerism, and
that one of the tripos papers should be designed to
test their knowledge in such subjects as appearances
at time of death, haunted houses, vampirism,
automatic writing, and possession.</p>
<p>“Of course they wouldn’t listen to me,” ran his
account of the matter, “for there is nothing that
these seats of learning are so frightened of as knowledge,
and the road to knowledge lies in the study of
things like these. The functions of the human
frame are, broadly speaking, known. They are a
country, anyhow, that has been charted and mapped
out. But outside that lie huge tracts of undiscovered
country, which certainly exist, and the real pioneers
of knowledge are those who, at the cost of being
derided as credulous and superstitious, want to push
on into those misty and probably perilous places.
I felt that I could be of more use by setting out
without compass or knapsack into the mists than
by sitting in a cage like a canary and chirping about
what was known. Besides, teaching is very bad
for a man who knows himself only to be a
learner: you only need to be a self-conceited ass to
teach.”</p>
<p>Here, then, in Francis Urcombe, was a delightful
neighbour to one who, like myself, has an uneasy
and burning curiosity about what he called the
“misty and perilous places”; and this last spring
we had a further and most welcome addition to our
pleasant little community, in the person of Mrs.
Amworth, widow of an Indian civil servant. Her
husband had been a judge in the North-West Provinces,
and after his death at Peshawar she came back to
England, and after a year in London found herself
starving for the ampler air and sunshine of the country
to take the place of the fogs and griminess of town.
She had, too, a special reason for settling in Maxley,
since her ancestors up till a hundred years ago had
long been native to the place, and in the old church-yard,
now disused, are many grave-stones bearing
her maiden name of Chaston. Big and energetic,
her vigorous and genial personality speedily woke
Maxley up to a higher degree of sociality than it
had ever known. Most of us were bachelors or
spinsters or elderly folk not much inclined to exert
ourselves in the expense and effort of hospitality,
and hitherto the gaiety of a small tea-party, with
bridge afterwards and goloshes (when it was wet)
to trip home in again for a solitary dinner, was about
the climax of our festivities. But Mrs. Amworth
showed us a more gregarious way, and set an example
of luncheon-parties and little dinners, which we began
to follow. On other nights when no such hospitality
was on foot, a lone man like myself found it pleasant
to know that a call on the telephone to Mrs. Amworth’s
house not a hundred yards off, and an inquiry as to
whether I might come over after dinner for a game
of piquet before bed-time, would probably evoke a
response of welcome. There she would be, with a
comrade-like eagerness for companionship, and there
was a glass of port and a cup of coffee and a cigarette
and a game of piquet. She played the piano, too,
in a free and exuberant manner, and had a charming
voice and sang to her own accompaniment; and as
the days grew long and the light lingered late, we
played our game in her garden, which in the course
of a few months she had turned from being a nursery
for slugs and snails into a glowing patch of luxuriant
blossoming. She was always cheery and jolly; she
was interested in everything, and in music, in gardening,
in games of all sorts was a competent performer.
Everybody (with one exception) liked her, everybody
felt her to bring with her the tonic of a sunny day.
That one exception was Francis Urcombe; he,
though he confessed he did not like her, acknowledged
that he was vastly interested in her. This always
seemed strange to me, for pleasant and jovial as she
was, I could see nothing in her that could call forth
conjecture or intrigued surmise, so healthy and
unmysterious a figure did she present. But of the
genuineness of Urcombe’s interest there could be no
doubt; one could see him watching and scrutinising
her. In matter of age, she frankly volunteered the
information that she was forty-five; but her briskness,
her activity, her unravaged skin, her coal-black
hair, made it difficult to believe that she was not
adopting an unusual device, and adding ten years
on to her age instead of subtracting them.</p>
<p>Often, also, as our quite unsentimental friendship
ripened, Mrs. Amworth would ring me up and propose
her advent. If I was busy writing, I was to give her,
so we definitely bargained, a frank negative, and
in answer I could hear her jolly laugh and her wishes
for a successful evening of work. Sometimes, before
her proposal arrived, Urcombe would already have
stepped across from his house opposite for a smoke
and a chat, and he, hearing who my intending visitor
was, always urged me to beg her to come. She and
I should play our piquet, said he, and he would look
on, if we did not object, and learn something of the
game. But I doubt whether he paid much attention
to it, for nothing could be clearer than that, under
that penthouse of forehead and thick eyebrows,
his attention was fixed not on the cards, but on one
of the players. But he seemed to enjoy an hour
spent thus, and often, until one particular evening
in July, he would watch her with the air of a man
who has some deep problem in front of him. She,
enthusiastically keen about our game, seemed not
to notice his scrutiny. Then came that evening,
when, as I see in the light of subsequent events,
began the first twitching of the veil that hid the secret
horror from my eyes. I did not know it then, though
I noticed that thereafter, if she rang up to propose
coming round, she always asked not only if I was at
leisure, but whether Mr. Urcombe was with me.
If so, she said, she would not spoil the chat of two
old bachelors, and laughingly wished me good
night.</p>
<p>Urcombe, on this occasion, had been with me for
some half-hour before Mrs. Amworth’s appearance,
and had been talking to me about the mediæval
beliefs concerning vampirism, one of those borderland
subjects which he declared had not been
sufficiently studied before it had been consigned
by the medical profession to the dust-heap of exploded
superstitions. There he sat, grim and eager, tracing,
with that pellucid clearness which had made him in
his Cambridge days so admirable a lecturer, the
history of those mysterious visitations. In them all
there were the same general features: one of those
ghoulish spirits took up its abode in a living man or
woman, conferring supernatural powers of bat-like
flight and glutting itself with nocturnal blood-feasts.
When its host died it continued to dwell in the corpse,
which remained undecayed. By day it rested, by
night it left the grave and went on its awful errands.
No European country in the Middle Ages seemed to
have escaped them; earlier yet, parallels were to be
found, in Roman and Greek and in Jewish history.</p>
<p>“It’s a large order to set all that evidence aside
as being moonshine,” he said. “Hundreds of totally
independent witnesses in many ages have testified
to the occurrence of these phenomena, and there’s
no explanation known to me which covers all the
facts. And if you feel inclined to say ‘Why, then,
if these are facts, do we not come across them now?’
there are two answers I can make you. One is that
there were diseases known in the Middle Ages, such
as the black death, which were certainly existent
then and which have become extinct since, but for
that reason we do not assert that such diseases never
existed. Just as the black death visited England
and decimated the population of Norfolk, so here in
this very district about three hundred years ago
there was certainly an outbreak of vampirism, and
Maxley was the centre of it. My second answer is
even more convincing, for I tell you that vampirism
is by no means extinct now. An outbreak of it
certainly occurred in India a year or two ago.”</p>
<p>At that moment I heard my knocker plied in the
cheerful and peremptory manner in which Mrs.
Amworth is accustomed to announce her arrival,
and I went to the door to open it.</p>
<p>“Come in at once,” I said, “and save me from
having my blood curdled. Mr. Urcombe has been
trying to alarm me.”</p>
<p>Instantly her vital, voluminous presence seemed
to fill the room.</p>
<p>“Ah, but how lovely!” she said. “I delight in
having my blood curdled. Go on with your ghost-story,
Mr. Urcombe. I adore ghost-stories.”</p>
<p>I saw that, as his habit was, he was intently
observing her.</p>
<p>“It wasn’t a ghost-story exactly,” said he. “I
was only telling our host how vampirism was not
extinct yet. I was saying that there was an outbreak
of it in India only a few years ago.”</p>
<p>There was a more than perceptible pause, and I
saw that, if Urcombe was observing her, she on her
side was observing him with fixed eye and parted
mouth. Then her jolly laugh invaded that rather
tense silence.</p>
<p>“Oh, what a shame!” she said. “You’re not
going to curdle my blood at all. Where did you
pick up such a tale, Mr. Urcombe? I have lived
for years in India and never heard a rumour of such
a thing. Some story-teller in the bazaars must have
invented it: they are famous at that.”</p>
<p>I could see that Urcombe was on the point of
saying something further, but checked himself.</p>
<p>“Ah! very likely that was it,” he said.</p>
<p>But something had disturbed our usual peaceful
sociability that night, and something had damped
Mrs. Amworth’s usual high spirits. She had no
gusto for her piquet, and left after a couple of games.
Urcombe had been silent too, indeed he hardly spoke
again till she departed.</p>
<p>“That was unfortunate,” he said, “for the outbreak
of—of a very mysterious disease, let us call
it, took place at Peshawar, where she and her husband
were. And——”</p>
<p>“Well?” I asked.</p>
<p>“He was one of the victims of it,” said he.
“Naturally I had quite forgotten that when I
spoke.”</p>
<p>The summer was unreasonably hot and rainless,
and Maxley suffered much from drought, and also
from a plague of big black night-flying gnats, the
bite of which was very irritating and virulent. They
came sailing in of an evening, settling on one’s skin
so quietly that one perceived nothing till the sharp
stab announced that one had been bitten. They
did not bite the hands or face, but chose always
the neck and throat for their feeding-ground, and
most of us, as the poison spread, assumed a temporary
goitre. Then about the middle of August appeared
the first of those mysterious cases of illness which
our local doctor attributed to the long-continued
heat coupled with the bite of these venomous insects.
The patient was a boy of sixteen or seventeen, the
son of Mrs. Amworth’s gardener, and the symptoms
were an anæmic pallor and a languid prostration,
accompanied by great drowsiness and an abnormal
appetite. He had, too, on his throat two small
punctures where, so Dr. Ross conjectured, one of
these great gnats had bitten him. But the odd thing
was that there was no swelling or inflammation
round the place where he had been bitten. The
heat at this time had begun to abate, but the cooler
weather failed to restore him, and the boy, in spite
of the quantity of good food which he so ravenously
swallowed, wasted away to a skin-clad skeleton.</p>
<p>I met Dr. Ross in the street one afternoon about
this time, and in answer to my inquiries about his
patient he said that he was afraid the boy was dying.
The case, he confessed, completely puzzled him:
some obscure form of pernicious anæmia was all he
could suggest. But he wondered whether Mr.
Urcombe would consent to see the boy, on the chance
of his being able to throw some new light on the case,
and since Urcombe was dining with me that night,
I proposed to Dr. Ross to join us. He could not do
this, but said he would look in later. When he came,
Urcombe at once consented to put his skill at the
other’s disposal, and together they went off at once.
Being thus shorn of my sociable evening, I telephoned
to Mrs. Amworth to know if I might inflict myself
on her for an hour. Her answer was a welcoming
affirmative, and between piquet and music the hour
lengthened itself into two. She spoke of the boy
who was lying so desperately and mysteriously ill,
and told me that she had often been to see him,
taking him nourishing and delicate food. But
to-day—and her kind eyes moistened as she spoke—she
was afraid she had paid her last visit. Knowing
the antipathy between her and Urcombe, I did not
tell her that he had been called into consultation;
and when I returned home she accompanied me to
my door, for the sake of a breath of night air, and
in order to borrow a magazine which contained an
article on gardening which she wished to read.</p>
<p>“Ah, this delicious night air,” she said, luxuriously
sniffing in the coolness. “Night air and gardening
are the great tonics. There is nothing so stimulating
as bare contact with rich mother earth. You are
never so fresh as when you have been grubbing in
the soil—black hands, black nails, and boots covered
with mud.” She gave her great jovial laugh.</p>
<p>“I’m a glutton for air and earth,” she said.
“Positively I look forward to death, for then I shall
be buried and have the kind earth all round me.
No leaden caskets for me—I have given explicit
directions. But what shall I do about air? Well,
I suppose one can’t have everything. The magazine?
A thousand thanks, I will faithfully return
it. Good night: garden and keep your windows
open, and you won’t have anæmia.”</p>
<p>“I always sleep with my windows open,” said I.</p>
<p>I went straight up to my bedroom, of which one
of the windows looks out over the street, and as I
undressed I thought I heard voices talking outside
not far away. But I paid no particular attention,
put out my lights, and falling asleep plunged into
the depths of a most horrible dream, distortedly
suggested no doubt, by my last words with Mrs.
Amworth. I dreamed that I woke, and found that
both my bedroom windows were shut. Half-suffocating
I dreamed that I sprang out of bed, and went
across to open them. The blind over the first was
drawn down, and pulling it up I saw, with the
indescribable horror of incipient nightmare, Mrs.
Amworth’s face suspended close to the pane in the
darkness outside, nodding and smiling at me. Pulling
down the blind again to keep that terror out, I rushed
to the second window on the other side of the room,
and there again was Mrs. Amworth’s face. Then
the panic came upon me in full blast; here was I
suffocating in the airless room, and whichever window
I opened Mrs. Amworth’s face would float in, like
those noiseless black gnats that bit before one was
aware. The nightmare rose to screaming point,
and with strangled yells I awoke to find my room
cool and quiet with both windows open and blinds
up and a half-moon high in its course, casting an
oblong of tranquil light on the floor. But even
when I was awake the horror persisted, and I lay
tossing and turning. I must have slept long before
the nightmare seized me, for now it was nearly day,
and soon in the east the drowsy eyelids of morning
began to lift.</p>
<p>I was scarcely downstairs next morning—for
after the dawn I slept late—when Urcombe rang up
to know if he might see me immediately. He came
in, grim and preoccupied, and I noticed that he was
pulling on a pipe that was not even filled.</p>
<p>“I want your help,” he said, “and so I must tell
you first of all what happened last night. I went round
with the little doctor to see his patient, and found
him just alive, but scarcely more. I instantly
diagnosed in my own mind what this anæmia, unaccountable
by any other explanation, meant. The
boy is the prey of a vampire.”</p>
<p>He put his empty pipe on the breakfast-table,
by which I had just sat down, and folded his arms,
looking at me steadily from under his overhanging
brows.</p>
<p>“Now about last night,” he said. “I insisted
that he should be moved from his father’s cottage
into my house. As we were carrying him on a
stretcher, whom should we meet but Mrs. Amworth?
She expressed shocked surprise that we were moving
him. Now why do you think she did that?”</p>
<p>With a start of horror, as I remembered my dream
that night before, I felt an idea come into my mind
so preposterous and unthinkable that I instantly
turned it out again.</p>
<p>“I haven’t the smallest idea,” I said.</p>
<p>“Then listen, while I tell you about what happened
later. I put out all light in the room where the boy
lay, and watched. One window was a little open,
for I had forgotten to close it, and about midnight
I heard something outside, trying apparently to push
it farther open. I guessed who it was—yes, it was
full twenty feet from the ground—and I peeped round
the corner of the blind. Just outside was the face
of Mrs. Amworth and her hand was on the frame
of the window. Very softly I crept close, and then
banged the window down, and I think I just caught
the tip of one of her fingers.”</p>
<p>“But it’s impossible,” I cried. “How could she
be floating in the air like that? And what had she
come for? Don’t tell me such——”</p>
<p>Once more, with closer grip, the remembrance of
my nightmare seized me.</p>
<p>“I am telling you what I saw,” said he. “And
all night long, until it was nearly day, she was
fluttering outside, like some terrible bat, trying to
gain admittance. Now put together various things
I have told you.”</p>
<p>He began checking them off on his fingers.</p>
<p>“Number one,” he said: “there was an outbreak
of disease similar to that which this boy is suffering
from at Peshawar, and her husband died of it. Number
two: Mrs. Amworth protested against my moving
the boy to my house. Number three: she, or the
demon that inhabits her body, a creature powerful
and deadly, tries to gain admittance. And add this,
too: in mediæval times there was an epidemic of
vampirism here at Maxley. The vampire, so the
accounts run, was found to be Elizabeth Chaston
... I see you remember Mrs. Amworth’s maiden
name. Finally, the boy is stronger this morning.
He would certainly not have been alive if he had
been visited again. And what do you make of it?”</p>
<p>There was a long silence, during which I found
this incredible horror assuming the hues of reality.</p>
<p>“I have something to add,” I said, “which may
or may not bear on it. You say that the—the
spectre went away shortly before dawn.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>I told him of my dream, and he smiled grimly.</p>
<p>“Yes, you did well to awake,” he said. “That
warning came from your subconscious self, which
never wholly slumbers, and cried out to you of
deadly danger. For two reasons, then, you must
help me: one to save others, the second to save
yourself.”</p>
<p>“What do you want me to do?” I asked.</p>
<p>“I want you first of all to help me in watching
this boy, and ensuring that she does not come near
him. Eventually I want you to help me in tracking
the thing down, in exposing and destroying it. It
is not human: it is an incarnate fiend. What steps
we shall have to take I don’t yet know.”</p>
<p>It was now eleven of the forenoon, and presently
I went across to his house for a twelve-hour vigil
while he slept, to come on duty again that night,
so that for the next twenty-four hours either Urcombe
or myself was always in the room where the boy, now
getting stronger every hour, was lying. The day
following was Saturday and a morning of brilliant,
pellucid weather, and already when I went across
to his house to resume my duty the stream of motors
down to Brighton had begun. Simultaneously I
saw Urcombe with a cheerful face, which boded good
news of his patient, coming out of his house, and
Mrs. Amworth, with a gesture of salutation to me
and a basket in her hand, walking up the broad strip
of grass which bordered the road. There we all three
met. I noticed (and saw that Urcombe noticed it
too) that one finger of her left hand was bandaged.</p>
<p>“Good morning to you both,” said she. “And
I hear your patient is doing well, Mr. Urcombe.
I have come to bring him a bowl of jelly, and to sit
with him for an hour. He and I are great friends.
I am overjoyed at his recovery.”</p>
<p>Urcombe paused a moment, as if making up his
mind, and then shot out a pointing finger at her.</p>
<p>“I forbid that,” he said. “You shall not sit with
him or see him. And you know the reason as well
as I do.”</p>
<p>I have never seen so horrible a change pass over
a human face as that which now blanched hers to
the colour of a grey mist. She put up her hand as
if to shield herself from that pointing finger, which
drew the sign of the cross in the air, and shrank
back cowering on to the road. There was a wild
hoot from a horn, a grinding of brakes, a shout—too
late—from a passing car, and one long scream
suddenly cut short. Her body rebounded from the
roadway after the first wheel had gone over it, and
the second followed. It lay there, quivering and
twitching, and was still.</p>
<p>She was buried three days afterwards in the
cemetery outside Maxley, in accordance with the
wishes she had told me that she had devised about
her interment, and the shock which her sudden and
awful death had caused to the little community began
by degrees to pass off. To two people only, Urcombe
and myself, the horror of it was mitigated from the first
by the nature of the relief that her death brought;
but, naturally enough, we kept our own counsel,
and no hint of what greater horror had been thus
averted was ever let slip. But, oddly enough, so
it seemed to me, he was still not satisfied about
something in connection with her, and would give no
answer to my questions on the subject. Then as the
days of a tranquil mellow September and the October
that followed began to drop away like the leaves of
the yellowing trees, his uneasiness relaxed. But
before the entry of November the seeming tranquillity
broke into hurricane.</p>
<p>I had been dining one night at the far end of the
village, and about eleven o’clock was walking home
again. The moon was of an unusual brilliance,
rendering all that it shone on as distinct as in some
etching. I had just come opposite the house which
Mrs. Amworth had occupied, where there was a
board up telling that it was to let, when I heard the
click of her front gate, and next moment I saw, with
a sudden chill and quaking of my very spirit, that
she stood there. Her profile, vividly illuminated,
was turned to me, and I could not be mistaken in
my identification of her. She appeared not to see
me (indeed the shadow of the yew hedge in front of
her garden enveloped me in its blackness) and she
went swiftly across the road, and entered the gate
of the house directly opposite. There I lost sight
of her completely.</p>
<p>My breath was coming in short pants as if I had
been running—and now indeed I ran, with fearful
backward glances, along the hundred yards that
separated me from my house and Urcombe’s. It
was to his that my flying steps took me, and next
minute I was within.</p>
<p>“What have you come to tell me?” he asked.
“Or shall I guess?”</p>
<p>“You can’t guess,” said I.</p>
<p>“No; it’s no guess. She has come back and you
have seen her. Tell me about it.”</p>
<p>I gave him my story.</p>
<p>“That’s Major Pearsall’s house,” he said. “Come
back with me there at once.”</p>
<p>“But what can we do?” I asked.</p>
<p>“I’ve no idea. That’s what we have got to find out.”</p>
<p>A minute later, we were opposite the house. When
I had passed it before, it was all dark; now lights
gleamed from a couple of windows upstairs. Even
as we faced it, the front door opened, and next
moment Major Pearsall emerged from the gate.
He saw us and stopped.</p>
<p>“I’m on my way to Dr. Ross,” he said quickly.
“My wife has been taken suddenly ill. She had
been in bed an hour when I came upstairs, and I
found her white as a ghost and utterly exhausted.
She had been to sleep, it seemed—— but you will
excuse me.”</p>
<p>“One moment, Major,” said Urcombe. “Was
there any mark on her throat?”</p>
<p>“How did you guess that?” said he. “There
was: one of those beastly gnats must have bitten
her twice there. She was streaming with blood.”</p>
<p>“And there’s someone with her?” asked Urcombe.</p>
<p>“Yes, I roused her maid.”</p>
<p>He went off, and Urcombe turned to me. “I
know now what we have to do,” he said. “Change
your clothes, and I’ll join you at your house.”</p>
<p>“What is it?” I asked.</p>
<p>“I’ll tell you on our way. We’re going to the
cemetery.”</p>
<hr/>
<p>He carried a pick, a shovel, and a screwdriver
when he rejoined me, and wore round his shoulders
a long coil of rope. As we walked, he gave me the
outlines of the ghastly hour that lay before us.</p>
<p>“What I have to tell you,” he said, “will seem
to you now too fantastic for credence, but before
dawn we shall see whether it outstrips reality.
By a most fortunate happening, you saw the
spectre, the astral body, whatever you choose to
call it, of Mrs. Amworth, going on its grisly business,
and therefore, beyond doubt, the vampire
spirit which abode in her during life animates her
again in death. That is not exceptional—indeed,
all these weeks since her death I have been expecting
it. If I am right, we shall find her body undecayed
and untouched by corruption.”</p>
<p>“But she has been dead nearly two months,”
said I.</p>
<p>“If she had been dead two years it would still be
so, if the vampire has possession of her. So remember:
whatever you see done, it will be done not
to her, who in the natural course would now be
feeding the grasses above her grave, but to a spirit
of untold evil and malignancy, which gives a phantom
life to her body.”</p>
<p>“But what shall I see done?” said I.</p>
<p>“I will tell you. We know that now, at this
moment, the vampire clad in her mortal semblance
is out; dining out. But it must get back before
dawn, and it will pass into the material form that
lies in her grave. We must wait for that, and then
with your help I shall dig up her body. If I am right,
you will look on her as she was in life, with the full
vigour of the dreadful nutriment she has received
pulsing in her veins. And then, when dawn has
come, and the vampire cannot leave the lair of her
body, I shall strike her with this”—and he pointed
to his pick—“through the heart, and she, who comes
to life again only with the animation the fiend gives
her, she and her hellish partner will be dead
indeed. Then we must bury her again, delivered at
last.”</p>
<p>We had come to the cemetery, and in the brightness
of the moonshine there was no difficulty in identifying
her grave. It lay some twenty yards from the small
chapel, in the porch of which, obscured by shadow,
we concealed ourselves. From there we had a clear
and open sight of the grave, and now we must wait
till its infernal visitor returned home. The night
was warm and windless, yet even if a freezing wind
had been raging I think I should have felt nothing
of it, so intense was my preoccupation as to what
the night and dawn would bring. There was a bell
in the turret of the chapel, that struck the quarters
of the hour, and it amazed me to find how swiftly
the chimes succeeded one another.</p>
<p>The moon had long set, but a twilight of stars
shone in a clear sky, when five o’clock of the morning
sounded from the turret. A few minutes more
passed, and then I felt Urcombe’s hand softly nudging
me; and looking out in the direction of his pointing
finger, I saw that the form of a woman, tall and large
in build, was approaching from the right. Noiselessly,
with a motion more of gliding and floating than
walking, she moved across the cemetery to the
grave which was the centre of our observation. She
moved round it as if to be certain of its identity,
and for a moment stood directly facing us. In the
greyness to which now my eyes had grown accustomed,
I could easily see her face, and recognise its features.</p>
<p>She drew her hand across her mouth as if wiping
it, and broke into a chuckle of such laughter as made
my hair stir on my head. Then she leaped on to the
grave, holding her hands high above her head, and
inch by inch disappeared into the earth. Urcombe’s
hand was laid on my arm, in an injunction to keep
still, but now he removed it.</p>
<p>“Come,” he said.</p>
<p>With pick and shovel and rope we went to the
grave. The earth was light and sandy, and soon
after six struck we had delved down to the coffin lid.
With his pick he loosened the earth round it, and,
adjusting the rope through the handles by which
it had been lowered, we tried to raise it. This was
a long and laborious business, and the light had begun
to herald day in the east before we had it out, and
lying by the side of the grave. With his screwdriver
he loosed the fastenings of the lid, and slid it aside,
and standing there we looked on the face of Mrs.
Amworth. The eyes, once closed in death, were
open, the cheeks were flushed with colour, the red,
full-lipped mouth seemed to smile.</p>
<p>“One blow and it is all over,” he said. “You
need not look.”</p>
<p>Even as he spoke he took up the pick again, and,
laying the point of it on her left breast, measured
his distance. And though I knew what was coming
I could not look away....</p>
<p>He grasped the pick in both hands, raised it an
inch or two for the taking of his aim, and then with
full force brought it down on her breast. A fountain
of blood, though she had been dead so long, spouted
high in the air, falling with the thud of a heavy
splash over the shroud, and simultaneously from
those red lips came one long, appalling cry, swelling
up like some hooting siren, and dying away again.
With that, instantaneous as a lightning flash, came
the touch of corruption on her face, the colour of it
faded to ash, the plump cheeks fell in, the mouth
dropped.</p>
<p>“Thank God, that’s over,” said he, and without
pause slipped the coffin lid back into its place.</p>
<p>Day was coming fast now, and, working like men
possessed, we lowered the coffin into its place again,
and shovelled the earth over it.... The birds
were busy with their earliest pipings as we went
back to Maxley.</p>


		</article>
	</body>
</html>
