<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Negotium Perambulans....</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="chapter-5" epub:type="se:short-story">
			
<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Negotium Perambulans....</h2>
<p>The casual tourist in West Cornwall may just possibly
have noticed, as he bowled along over the bare high
plateau between Penzance and the Land’s End, a
dilapidated signpost pointing down a steep lane and
bearing on its battered finger the faded inscription
“Polearn 2 miles,” but probably very few have had
the curiosity to traverse those two miles in order to
see a place to which their guide-books award so
cursory a notice. It is described there, in a couple
of unattractive lines, as a small fishing village with
a church of no particular interest except for certain
carved and painted wooden panels (originally belonging
to an earlier edifice) which form an altar-rail.
But the church at St. Creed (the tourist is reminded)
has a similar decoration far superior in point of
preservation and interest, and thus even the ecclesiastically
disposed are not lured to Polearn. So
meagre a bait is scarce worth swallowing, and a
glance at the very steep lane which in dry weather
presents a carpet of sharp-pointed stones, and after
rain a muddy watercourse, will almost certainly decide
him not to expose his motor or his bicycle to risks
like these in so sparsely populated a district. Hardly
a house has met his eye since he left Penzance, and
the possible trundling of a punctured bicycle for half
a dozen weary miles seems a high price to pay for
the sight of a few painted panels.</p>
<p>Polearn, therefore, even in the high noon of the
tourist season, is little liable to invasion, and for the
rest of the year I do not suppose that a couple of
folk a day traverse those two miles (long ones at that)
of steep and stony gradient. I am not forgetting
the postman in this exiguous estimate, for the days
are few when, leaving his pony and cart at the top
of the hill, he goes as far as the village, since but a
few hundred yards down the lane there stands a
large white box, like a sea-trunk, by the side of the
road, with a slit for letters and a locked door. Should
he have in his wallet a registered letter or be the
bearer of a parcel too large for insertion in the square
lips of the sea-trunk, he must needs trudge down
the hill and deliver the troublesome missive, leaving
it in person on the owner, and receiving some small
reward of coin or refreshment for his kindness. But
such occasions are rare, and his general routine is
to take out of the box such letters as may have been
deposited there, and insert in their place such letters
as he has brought. These will be called for, perhaps
that day or perhaps the next, by an emissary from
the Polearn post-office. As for the fishermen of
the place, who, in their export trade, constitute the
chief link of movement between Polearn and the
outside world, they would not dream of taking their
catch up the steep lane and so, with six miles farther
of travel, to the market at Penzance. The sea route
is shorter and easier, and they deliver their wares
to the pier-head. Thus, though the sole industry
of Polearn is sea-fishing, you will get no fish there
unless you have bespoken your requirements to one
of the fishermen. Back come the trawlers as empty
as a haunted house, while their spoils are in the
fish-train that is speeding to London.</p>
<p>Such isolation of a little community, continued,
as it has been, for centuries, produces isolation in
the individual as well, and nowhere will you find
greater independence of character than among the
people of Polearn. But they are linked together,
so it has always seemed to me, by some mysterious
comprehension: it is as if they had all been initiated
into some ancient rite, inspired and framed by forces
visible and invisible. The winter storms that batter
the coast, the vernal spell of the spring, the hot,
still summers, the season of rains and autumnal
decay, have made a spell which, line by line, has been
communicated to them, concerning the powers,
evil and good, that rule the world, and manifest
themselves in ways benignant or terrible....</p>
<p>I came to Polearn first at the age of ten, a small
boy, weak and sickly, and threatened with pulmonary
trouble. My father’s business kept him in London,
while for me abundance of fresh air and a mild
climate were considered essential conditions if I
was to grow to manhood. His sister had married
the vicar of Polearn, Richard Bolitho, himself native
to the place, and so it came about that I spent three
years, as a paying guest, with my relations. Richard
Bolitho owned a fine house in the place, which he
inhabited in preference to the vicarage, which he
let to a young artist, John Evans, on whom the spell
of Polearn had fallen, for from year’s beginning to
year’s end he never left it. There was a solid roofed
shelter, open on one side to the air, built for me in
the garden, and here I lived and slept, passing
scarcely one hour out of the twenty-four behind
walls and windows. I was out on the bay with the
fisher-folk, or wandering along the gorse-clad cliffs
that climbed steeply to right and left of the deep
combe where the village lay, or pottering about on
the pier-head, or bird’s-nesting in the bushes with
the boys of the village. Except on Sunday and for
the few daily hours of my lessons, I might do what
I pleased so long as I remained in the open air.
About the lessons there was nothing formidable;
my uncle conducted me through flowering bypaths
among the thickets of arithmetic, and made pleasant
excursions into the elements of Latin grammar, and
above all, he made me daily give him an account, in
clear and grammatical sentences, of what had been
occupying my mind or my movements. Should I
select to tell him about a walk along the cliffs, my
speech must be orderly, not vague, slip-shod notes
of what I had observed. In this way, too, he trained
my observation, for he would bid me tell him what
flowers were in bloom, and what birds hovered fishing
over the sea or were building in the bushes. For
that I owe him a perennial gratitude, for to observe
and to express my thoughts in the clear spoken word
became my life’s profession.</p>
<p>But far more formidable than my weekday tasks
was the prescribed routine for Sunday. Some dark
embers compounded of Calvinism and mysticism
smouldered in my uncle’s soul, and made it a
day of terror. His sermon in the morning scorched
us with a foretaste of the eternal fires reserved for
unrepentant sinners, and he was hardly less terrifying
at the children’s service in the afternoon. Well
do I remember his exposition of the doctrine of
guardian angels. A child, he said, might think
himself secure in such angelic care, but let him
beware of committing any of those numerous offences
which would cause his guardian to turn his face from
him, for as sure as there were angels to protect us,
there were also evil and awful presences which were
ready to pounce; and on them he dwelt with peculiar
gusto. Well, too, do I remember in the morning
sermon his commentary on the carved panels of the
altar-rails to which I have already alluded. There
was the angel of the Annunciation there, and the
angel of the Resurrection, but not less was there
the witch of Endor, and, on the fourth panel, a scene
that concerned me most of all. This fourth panel
(he came down from his pulpit to trace its time-worn
features) represented the lych-gate of the church-yard
at Polearn itself, and indeed the resemblance when
thus pointed out was remarkable. In the entry
stood the figure of a robed priest holding up a Cross,
with which he faced a terrible creature like a gigantic
slug, that reared itself up in front of him. That, so
ran my uncle’s interpretation, was some evil agency,
such as he had spoken about to us children, of almost
infinite malignity and power, which could alone be
combated by firm faith and a pure heart. Below
ran the legend “<i>Negotium perambulans in tenebris</i>”
from the ninety-first Psalm. We should find it
translated there, “the pestilence that walketh in
darkness,” which but feebly rendered the Latin. It
was more deadly to the soul than any pestilence
that can only kill the body: it was the Thing, the
Creature, the Business that trafficked in the outer
Darkness, a minister of God’s wrath on the
unrighteous....</p>
<p>I could see, as he spoke, the looks which the
congregation exchanged with each other, and knew
that his words were evoking a surmise, a remembrance.
Nods and whispers passed between them, they
understood to what he alluded, and with the inquisitiveness
of boyhood I could not rest till I had wormed
the story out of my friends among the fisher-boys,
as, next morning, we sat basking and naked in the
sun after our bathe. One knew one bit of it, one
another, but it pieced together into a truly alarming
legend. In bald outline it was as follows:</p>
<p>A church far more ancient than that in which my
uncle terrified us every Sunday had once stood not
three hundred yards away, on the shelf of level ground
below the quarry from which its stones were hewn.
The owner of the land had pulled this down, and
erected for himself a house on the same site out of
these materials, keeping, in a very ecstasy of wickedness,
the altar, and on this he dined and played dice
afterwards. But as he grew old some black melancholy
seized him, and he would have lights burning
there all night, for he had deadly fear of the darkness.
On one winter evening there sprang up such a gale
as was never before known, which broke in the
windows of the room where he had supped, and
extinguished the lamps. Yells of terror brought in
his servants, who found him lying on the floor with
the blood streaming from his throat. As they
entered some huge black shadow seemed to move
away from him, crawled across the floor and up the
wall and out of the broken window.</p>
<p>“There he lay a-dying,” said the last of my informants,
“and him that had been a great burly man
was withered to a bag o’ skin, for the critter had
drained all the blood from him. His last breath was
a scream, and he hollered out the same words as
parson read off the screen.”</p>
<p>“<i>Negotium perambulans in tenebris</i>,” I suggested
eagerly.</p>
<p>“Thereabouts. Latin anyhow.”</p>
<p>“And after that?” I asked.</p>
<p>“Nobody would go near the place, and the old
house rotted and fell in ruins till three years ago,
when along comes Mr. Dooliss from Penzance, and
built the half of it up again. But he don’t care much
about such critters, nor about Latin neither. He
takes his bottle of whisky a day and gets drunk’s
a lord in the evening. Eh, I’m gwine home to my
dinner.”</p>
<p>Whatever the authenticity of the legend, I had
certainly heard the truth about Mr. Dooliss from
Penzance, who from that day became an object of
keen curiosity on my part, the more so because the
quarry-house adjoined my uncle’s garden. The
Thing that walked in the dark failed to stir my
imagination, and already I was so used to sleeping
alone in my shelter that the night had no terrors
for me. But it would be intensely exciting to wake
at some timeless hour and hear Mr. Dooliss yelling,
and conjecture that the Thing had got him.</p>
<p>But by degrees the whole story faded from my
mind, overscored by the more vivid interests of the
day, and, for the last two years of my out-door life
in the vicarage garden, I seldom thought about Mr.
Dooliss and the possible fate that might await him
for his temerity in living in the place where that
Thing of darkness had done business. Occasionally
I saw him over the garden fence, a great yellow lump
of a man, with slow and staggering gait, but never
did I set eyes on him outside his gate, either in the
village street or down on the beach. He interfered
with none, and no one interfered with him. If he
wanted to run the risk of being the prey of the
legendary nocturnal monster, or quietly drink himself
to death, it was his affair. My uncle, so I gathered,
had made several attempts to see him when first
he came to live at Polearn, but Mr. Dooliss appeared
to have no use for parsons, but said he was not at
home and never returned the call.</p>
<hr/>
<p>After three years of sun, wind, and rain, I had
completely outgrown my early symptoms and had
become a tough, strapping youngster of thirteen.
I was sent to Eton and Cambridge, and in due course
ate my dinners and became a barrister. In twenty
years from that time I was earning a yearly income
of five figures, and had already laid by in sound
securities a sum that brought me dividends which
would, for one of my simple tastes and frugal habits,
supply me with all the material comforts I needed
on this side of the grave. The great prizes of my
profession were already within my reach, but I had
no ambition beckoning me on, nor did I want a wife
and children, being, I must suppose, a natural celibate.
In fact there was only one ambition which through
these busy years had held the lure of blue and far-off
hills to me, and that was to get back to Polearn,
and live once more isolated from the world with
the sea and the gorse-clad hills for play-fellows,
and the secrets that lurked there for exploration.
The spell of it had been woven about my heart,
and I can truly say that there had hardly passed a
day in all those years in which the thought of it
and the desire for it had been wholly absent from
my mind. Though I had been in frequent communication
with my uncle there during his lifetime,
and, after his death, with his widow who still lived
there, I had never been back to it since I embarked
on my profession, for I knew that if I went
there, it would be a wrench beyond my power to
tear myself away again. But I had made up my
mind that when once I had provided for my own
independence, I would go back there not to leave
it again. And yet I did leave it again, and now
nothing in the world would induce me to turn down
the lane from the road that leads from Penzance to
the Land’s End, and see the sides of the combe rise
steep above the roofs of the village and hear the gulls
chiding as they fish in the bay. One of the things
invisible, of the dark powers, leaped into light, and
I saw it with my eyes.</p>
<p>The house where I had spent those three years of
boyhood had been left for life to my aunt, and when
I made known to her my intention of coming back
to Polearn, she suggested that, till I found a suitable
house or found her proposal unsuitable, I should
come to live with her.</p>
<p>“The house is too big for a lone old woman,”
she wrote, “and I have often thought of quitting
and taking a little cottage sufficient for me and my
requirements. But come and share it, my dear,
and if you find me troublesome, you or I can go.
You may want solitude—most people in Polearn do—and
will leave me. Or else I will leave you: one
of the main reasons of my stopping here all these
years was a feeling that I must not let the old house
starve. Houses starve, you know, if they are not
lived in. They die a lingering death; the spirit
in them grows weaker and weaker, and at last fades
out of them. Isn’t this nonsense to your London
notions?...”</p>
<p>Naturally I accepted with warmth this tentative
arrangement, and on an evening in June found
myself at the head of the lane leading down to
Polearn, and once more I descended into the steep
valley between the hills. Time had stood still
apparently for the combe, the dilapidated signpost
(or its successor) pointed a rickety finger down the
lane, and a few hundred yards farther on was the
white box for the exchange of letters. Point after
remembered point met my eye, and what I saw
was not shrunk, as is often the case with the revisited
scenes of childhood, into a smaller scale. There stood
the post-office, and there the church and close beside
it the vicarage, and beyond, the tall shrubberies
which separated the house for which I was bound
from the road, and beyond that again the grey roofs
of the quarry-house damp and shining with the
moist evening wind from the sea. All was exactly
as I remembered it, and, above all, that sense of
seclusion and isolation. Somewhere above the tree-tops
climbed the lane which joined the main road
to Penzance, but all that had become immeasurably
distant. The years that had passed since last I
turned in at the well-known gate faded like a frosty
breath, and vanished in this warm, soft air. There
were law-courts somewhere in memory’s dull book
which, if I cared to turn the pages, would tell me
that I had made a name and a great income there.
But the dull book was closed now, for I was back in
Polearn, and the spell was woven around me again.</p>
<p>And if Polearn was unchanged, so too was Aunt
Hester, who met me at the door. Dainty and
china-white she had always been, and the years
had not aged but only refined her. As we sat and
talked after dinner she spoke of all that had happened
in Polearn in that score of years, and yet somehow
the changes of which she spoke seemed but to confirm
the immutability of it all. As the recollection of
names came back to me, I asked her about the
quarry-house and Mr. Dooliss, and her face gloomed
a little as with the shadow of a cloud on a spring day.</p>
<p>“Yes, Mr. Dooliss,” she said, “poor Mr. Dooliss,
how well I remember him, though it must be ten
years and more since he died. I never wrote to you
about it, for it was all very dreadful, my dear, and I
did not want to darken your memories of Polearn.
Your uncle always thought that something of the
sort might happen if he went on in his wicked,
drunken ways, and worse than that, and though
nobody knew exactly what took place, it was the sort
of thing that might have been anticipated.”</p>
<p>“But what more or less happened, Aunt Hester?”
I asked.</p>
<p>“Well, of course I can’t tell you everything, for
no one knew it. But he was a very sinful man, and
the scandal about him at Newlyn was shocking.
And then he lived, too, in the quarry-house.... I
wonder if by any chance you remember a sermon
of your uncle’s when he got out of the pulpit and
explained that panel in the altar-rails, the one, I
mean, with the horrible creature rearing itself up
outside the lych-gate?”</p>
<p>“Yes, I remember perfectly,” said I.</p>
<p>“Ah. It made an impression on you, I suppose,
and so it did on all who heard him, and that impression
got stamped and branded on us all when the catastrophe
occurred. Somehow Mr. Dooliss got to hear
about your uncle’s sermon, and in some drunken
fit he broke into the church and smashed the panel
to atoms. He seems to have thought that there
was some magic in it, and that if he destroyed that
he would get rid of the terrible fate that was threatening
him. For I must tell you that before he committed
that dreadful sacrilege he had been a haunted man:
he hated and feared darkness, for he thought that
the creature on the panel was on his track, but that
as long as he kept lights burning it could not touch
him. But the panel, to his disordered mind, was
the root of his terror, and so, as I said, he broke into
the church and attempted—you will see why I said
‘attempted’—to destroy it. It certainly was found
in splinters next morning, when your uncle went into
church for matins, and knowing Mr. Dooliss’s fear
of the panel, he went across to the quarry-house
afterwards and taxed him with its destruction.
The man never denied it; he boasted of what he
had done. There he sat, though it was early morning,
drinking his whisky.</p>
<p>“‘I’ve settled your Thing for you,’ he said, ‘and
your sermon too. A fig for such superstitions.’</p>
<p>“Your uncle left him without answering his
blasphemy, meaning to go straight into Penzance
and give information to the police about this outrage
to the church, but on his way back from the quarry-house
he went into the church again, in order to be
able to give details about the damage, and there
in the screen was the panel, untouched and uninjured.
And yet he had himself seen it smashed, and Mr.
Dooliss had confessed that the destruction of it
was his work. But there it was, and whether the
power of God had mended it or some other power,
who knows?”</p>
<p>This was Polearn indeed, and it was the spirit of
Polearn that made me accept all Aunt Hester was
telling me as attested fact. It had happened like
that. She went on in her quiet voice.</p>
<p>“Your uncle recognised that some power beyond
police was at work, and he did not go to Penzance
or give information about the outrage, for the
evidence of it had vanished.”</p>
<p>A sudden spate of scepticism swept over me.</p>
<p>“There must have been some mistake,” I said.
“It hadn’t been broken....”</p>
<p>She smiled.</p>
<p>“Yes, my dear, but you have been in London
so long,” she said. “Let me, anyhow, tell you the
rest of my story. That night, for some reason, I
could not sleep. It was very hot and airless; I
dare say you will think that the sultry conditions
accounted for my wakefulness. Once and again,
as I went to the window to see if I could not admit
more air, I could see from it the quarry-house, and
I noticed the first time that I left my bed that it
was blazing with lights. But the second time I
saw that it was all in darkness, and as I wondered
at that, I heard a terrible scream, and the moment
afterwards the steps of someone coming at full speed
down the road outside the gate. He yelled as he
ran; ‘Light, light!’ he called out. ‘Give me light,
or it will catch me!’ It was very terrible to hear
that, and I went to rouse my husband, who was
sleeping in the dressing-room across the passage.
He wasted no time, but by now the whole village
was aroused by the screams, and when he got down
to the pier he found that all was over. The tide was
low, and on the rocks at its foot was lying the body
of Mr. Dooliss. He must have cut some artery
when he fell on those sharp edges of stone, for he
had bled to death, they thought, and though he was
a big burly man, his corpse was but skin and bones.
Yet there was no pool of blood round him, such as
you would have expected. Just skin and bones
as if every drop of blood in his body had been sucked
out of him!”</p>
<p>She leaned forward.</p>
<p>“You and I, my dear, know what happened,”
she said, “or at least can guess. God has His
instruments of vengeance on those who bring wickedness
into places that have been holy. Dark and
mysterious are His ways.”</p>
<p>Now what I should have thought of such a story
if it had been told me in London I can easily imagine.
There was such an obvious explanation: the man
in question had been a drunkard, what wonder if
the demons of delirium pursued him? But here in
Polearn it was different.</p>
<p>“And who is in the quarry-house now?” I asked.
“Years ago the fisher-boys told me the story of the
man who first built it and of his horrible end. And
now again it has happened. Surely no one has
ventured to inhabit it once more?”</p>
<p>I saw in her face, even before I asked that question,
that somebody had done so.</p>
<p>“Yes, it is lived in again,” said she, “for there
is no end to the blindness.... I don’t know if
you remember him. He was tenant of the vicarage
many years ago.”</p>
<p>“John Evans,” said I.</p>
<p>“Yes. Such a nice fellow he was too. Your
uncle was pleased to get so good a tenant. And
now——”</p>
<p>She rose.</p>
<p>“Aunt Hester, you shouldn’t leave your sentences
unfinished,” I said.</p>
<p>She shook her head.</p>
<p>“My dear, that sentence will finish itself,” she
said. “But what a time of night! I must go to
bed, and you too, or they will think we have to keep
lights burning here through the dark hours.”</p>
<hr/>
<p>Before getting into bed I drew my curtains wide
and opened all the windows to the warm tide of the
sea air that flowed softly in. Looking out into the
garden I could see in the moonlight the roof of the
shelter, in which for three years I had lived, gleaming
with dew. That, as much as anything, brought
back the old days to which I had now returned, and
they seemed of one piece with the present, as if no
gap of more than twenty years sundered them. The
two flowed into one like globules of mercury uniting
into a softly shining globe, of mysterious lights and
reflections. Then, raising my eyes a little, I saw
against the black hill-side the windows of the
quarry-house still alight.</p>
<p>Morning, as is so often the case, brought no
shattering of my illusion. As I began to regain
consciousness, I fancied that I was a boy again waking
up in the shelter in the garden, and though, as I
grew more widely awake, I smiled at the impression,
that on which it was based I found to be indeed
true. It was sufficient now as then to be here, to
wander again on the cliffs, and hear the popping of
the ripened seed-pods on the gorse-bushes; to stray
along the shore to the bathing-cove, to float and drift
and swim in the warm tide, and bask on the sand,
and watch the gulls fishing, to lounge on the pier-head
with the fisher-folk, to see in their eyes and hear
in their quiet speech the evidence of secret things
not so much known to them as part of their instincts
and their very being. There were powers and
presences about me; the white poplars that stood
by the stream that babbled down the valley knew
of them, and showed a glimpse of their knowledge
sometimes, like the gleam of their white underleaves;
the very cobbles that paved the street were soaked
in it.... All that I wanted was to lie there and
grow soaked in it too; unconsciously, as a boy, I
had done that, but now the process must be conscious.
I must know what stir of forces, fruitful and mysterious,
seethed along the hill-side at noon, and
sparkled at night on the sea. They could be known,
they could even be controlled by those who were
masters of the spell, but never could they be spoken
of, for they were dwellers in the innermost, grafted
into the eternal life of the world. There were dark
secrets as well as these clear, kindly powers, and
to these no doubt belonged the <i>negotium perambulans
in tenebris</i> which, though of deadly malignity, might
be regarded not only as evil, but as the avenger of
sacrilegious and impious deeds.... All this was
part of the spell of Polearn, of which the seeds had
long lain dormant in me. But now they were
sprouting, and who knew what strange flower would
unfold on their stems?</p>
<p>It was not long before I came across John Evans.
One morning, as I lay on the beach, there came
shambling across the sand a man stout and middle-aged
with the face of Silenus. He paused as he drew
near and regarded me from narrow eyes.</p>
<p>“Why, you’re the little chap that used to live
in the parson’s garden,” he said. “Don’t you
recognise me?”</p>
<p>I saw who it was when he spoke: his voice, I
think, instructed me, and recognising it, I could
see the features of the strong, alert young man in
this gross caricature.</p>
<p>“Yes, you’re John Evans,” I said. “You used
to be very kind to me: you used to draw pictures
for me.”</p>
<p>“So I did, and I’ll draw you some more. Been
bathing? That’s a risky performance. You never
know what lives in the sea, nor what lives on the
land for that matter. Not that I heed them. I stick
to work and whisky. God! I’ve learned to paint
since I saw you, and drink too for that matter. I
live in the quarry-house, you know, and it’s a powerful
thirsty place. Come and have a look at my things
if you’re passing. Staying with your aunt, are you?
I could do a wonderful portrait of her. Interesting
face; she knows a lot. People who live at Polearn
get to know a lot, though I don’t take much stock
in that sort of knowledge myself.”</p>
<p>I do not know when I have been at once so repelled
and interested. Behind the mere grossness of his
face there lurked something which, while it appalled,
yet fascinated me. His thick lisping speech had
the same quality. And his paintings, what would
they be like?...</p>
<p>“I was just going home,” I said. “I’ll gladly
come in, if you’ll allow me.”</p>
<p>He took me through the untended and overgrown
garden into the house which I had never yet entered.
A great grey cat was sunning itself in the window,
and an old woman was laying lunch in a corner of
the cool hall into which the door opened. It was
built of stone, and the carved mouldings let into the
walls, the fragments of gargoyles and sculptured
images, bore testimony to the truth of its having
been built out of the demolished church. In one
corner was an oblong and carved wooden table
littered with a painter’s apparatus and stacks of
canvases leaned against the walls.</p>
<p>He jerked his thumb towards a head of an angel
that was built into the mantelpiece and giggled.</p>
<p>“Quite a sanctified air,” he said, “so we tone
it down for the purposes of ordinary life by a different
sort of art. Have a drink? No? Well, turn over
some of my pictures while I put myself to rights.”</p>
<p>He was justified in his own estimate of his skill:
he could paint (and apparently he could paint anything),
but never have I seen pictures so inexplicably
hellish. There were exquisite studies of trees, and
you knew that something lurked in the flickering
shadows. There was a drawing of his cat sunning
itself in the window, even as I had just now seen it,
and yet it was no cat but some beast of awful malignity.
There was a boy stretched naked on the sands, not
human, but some evil thing which had come out of
the sea. Above all there were pictures of his garden
overgrown and jungle-like, and you knew that in
the bushes were presences ready to spring out on
you....</p>
<p>“Well, do you like my style?” he said as he
came up, glass in hand. (The tumbler of spirits
that he held had not been diluted.) “I try to paint
the essence of what I see, not the mere husk and skin
of it, but its nature, where it comes from and what
gave it birth. There’s much in common between a
cat and a fuchsia-bush if you look at them closely
enough. Everything came out of the slime of the
pit, and it’s all going back there. I should like to
do a picture of you some day. I’d hold the mirror
up to Nature, as that old lunatic said.”</p>
<p>After this first meeting I saw him occasionally
throughout the months of that wonderful summer.
Often he kept to his house and to his painting for
days together, and then perhaps some evening I
would find him lounging on the pier, always alone,
and every time we met thus the repulsion and interest
grew, for every time he seemed to have gone farther
along a path of secret knowledge towards some
evil shrine where complete initiation awaited him....
And then suddenly the end came.</p>
<p>I had met him thus one evening on the cliffs while
the October sunset still burned in the sky, but over
it with amazing rapidity there spread from the west
a great blackness of cloud such as I have never seen
for denseness. The light was sucked from the sky,
the dusk fell in ever thicker layers. He suddenly
became conscious of this.</p>
<p>“I must get back as quick as I can,” he said.
“It will be dark in a few minutes, and my servant is
out. The lamps will not be lit.”</p>
<p>He stepped out with extraordinary briskness for
one who shambled and could scarcely lift his feet,
and soon broke out into a stumbling run. In the
gathering darkness I could see that his face was
moist with the dew of some unspoken terror.</p>
<p>“You must come with me,” he panted, “for so
we shall get the lights burning the sooner. I cannot
do without light.”</p>
<p>I had to exert myself to the full to keep up with
him, for terror winged him, and even so I fell behind,
so that when I came to the garden gate, he was
already half-way up the path to the house. I saw
him enter, leaving the door wide, and found him
fumbling with matches. But his hand so trembled
that he could not transfer the light to the wick of
the lamp.</p>
<p>“But what’s the hurry about?” I asked.</p>
<p>Suddenly his eyes focused themselves on the
open door behind me, and he jumped from his seat
beside the table which had once been the altar of
God, with a gasp and a scream.</p>
<p>“No, no!” he cried. “Keep it off!...”</p>
<p>I turned and saw what he had seen. The Thing
had entered and now was swiftly sliding across the
floor towards him, like some gigantic caterpillar.
A stale phosphorescent light came from it, for though
the dusk had grown to blackness outside, I could
see it quite distinctly in the awful light of its own
presence. From it too there came an odour of
corruption and decay, as from slime that has long lain
below water. It seemed to have no head, but on the
front of it was an orifice of puckered skin which
opened and shut and slavered at the edges. It was
hairless, and slug-like in shape and in texture. As it
advanced its fore-part reared itself from the ground,
like a snake about to strike, and it fastened on
him....</p>
<p>At that sight, and with the yells of his agony in
my ears, the panic which had struck me relaxed into
a hopeless courage, and with palsied, impotent hands
I tried to lay hold of the Thing. But I could not:
though something material was there, it was impossible
to grasp it; my hands sunk in it as in thick
mud. It was like wrestling with a nightmare.</p>
<p>I think that but a few seconds elapsed before all
was over. The screams of the wretched man sank
to moans and mutterings as the Thing fell on him:
he panted once or twice and was still. For a moment
longer there came gurglings and sucking noises,
and then it slid out even as it had entered. I lit
the lamp which he had fumbled with, and there on
the floor he lay, no more than a rind of skin in loose
folds over projecting bones.</p>


		</article>
	</body>
</html>
